We've been using several concepts before I taught them. Here's the median code from the end of the previous lesson:

/* Given an array of numbers, returns the median of those numbers.
 * If there are an even number of values, returns the mean of the middle two.
 * Returns null if the function is passed something other than an array or
 * is passed an empty array. Does not mutate the original array.
 */
function median(unsortedAr) {
    if (!Array.isArray(unsortedAr)) return null;
    var sortedAr = unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)});
    var midIndex = sortedAr.length / 2 - 0.5;
    return ( midIndex % 1
        ? (sortedAr[Math.floor(midIndex)] + sortedAr[Math.floor(midIndex+1)]) / 2
        : sortedAr[midIndex]   );
}

It uses arrays. So what's an array?

Just as a function is a special kind of object in JavaScript, an array is a special kind of object. A string is almost an object, but an array and a function really are each a special kind of object. A function is the kind of object that can carry around a piece of code and run it when asked to. An array can carry around a list of values and manipulate those values when asked to.

An object is a data structure for stashing values that we can read and write on the basis of a string key. An array can read and write values on the basis of an integer index. In addition, since JavaScript arrays are also JavaScript objects, they retain the talent of looking up values by string key as well.

First, let's look at the core talent of an array: integer indexing.

A variable can have one value at a time. One possible value is a reference to an object. Since an array is a kind of object, a variable can hold a reference to an array. Just as strings and functions have a special syntax to create one, there's a literal syntax for arrays as well. It's a comma-separated list of expressions inside square brackets. That compound literal tells the interpreter to create a new populated array that matches your description.

Type this into the console:

> var myArray = [ 7, 7*3+1, -24.7, 0 ]
< undefined

After that line gets executed, there will be a new array object somewhere in memory, and a variable named myArray holding whose value is a reference to that object. The console returns undefined because running a `var` statement always leaves the expression accumulator untouched, and the console loads `undefined` before executing your command as JavaScript code. Try this to show the effect:

> 2+1; var x = true
< 3

The semicolon tells the JS interpreter to go ahead and run whatever is to the left of it. We don't normally type trailing semicolons in the console because hitting enter tells the console to pass the command to JS as a fully runnable piece of code. The semicolon lets us have more than one JS statement in a console command. In the previous command we see 3 as the return value because `var` left the expression accumulator untouched.

The variable `myArray` is still in the JavaScript memory area.

> 9; var y = x = myVar;
< 9

Although the second `=` is an operator, the expression accumulator is still 9.0 from evaluating the first tiny statement as an expression. Apparently a `var` statement carefully preserves the expression accumulator and restores it after any expressions within the `var` statement. In retrospect, `true` is also an expression `[ 7, 7*3+1, -24.7, 0 ]` are also expressions, and yet they weren't left behind in the accumulator. Don't actually write code that relies on this phenomenon. It's bad practice to rely on such obscure language effects.

Now there's one array in memory, and there are three variables with references to that array.

> x
< [7, 22, -24.7, 0]
> y
< [7, 22, -24.7, 0]
> myArray
< [7, 22, -24.7, 0]

We can mutate (change the contents of) that array.

> x[1] = 1
< 1
> y
< [7, 1, -24.7, 0]
> myArray
< [7, 1, -24.7, 0]

But changing the contents of a variable doesn't change the contents of the array.

> x = [7, 1, -24.7, 0] // Creates a brand new identical array
< [7, 1, -24.7, 0]
> x[1] = null
< null
> x
< [7, null, -24.7, 0]
> myArray
< [7, 1, -24.7, 0]
> y // Guess what's in y right now

The array literal causes the interpreter to create a new array somewhere in memory and resolves that literal (which is a kind of expression) to the reference to that array. Arrays are bona fide objects, so they are passed "by reference" not "by value". The variables `x`, `y`, and `myArray` all contain reference to objects right now. Two of those references indicate the same array in memory, and the third indicates a completely different array in memory. Each of those two arrays has similar contents.

The primary purpose of an array is to hold more than one value in a series of consecutive memory locations. An array can do anything an object can do plus one extra trick. An array has an indexed data store deep within it (the "real" array inside the array object), which is accessible by indexing a non-fraction-bearing, non-negative, numeric value. The array store can grow dynamically just by writing to a higher index.

Array elements (memory locations in the indexed data store) are much faster to look up than object properties because the only work the interpreter has to do to jump right to an element is a very simple piece of integer arithmetic. There's a lot more computational work to finding an object property by key, though even that is very fast. Perhaps the most important purpose of an array is to keep an ordered list of values. Objects are not required by ECMA to follow any particular sequence. They're not alphabetically sorted. You can't rely on any particular order of retrieving properties when you iterate over an object. Even if you find it is consistent in every interpreter you test, there is no guarantee that won't change any day. But you can rely on an array keeping its values in the order you put them. That's what arrays are for.

We can read from the array we just made.

> myArray[2]
< -24.7
> myArray[0]
< 7

Arrays are zero-indexed, meaning the number zero indexes the first element of the array. Think of this as the distance from the beginning. It is the norm in computer science to count starting at zero to eliminate computational and addressing waste. It is the norm in human culture to number items starting at 1. Software engineers number things starting at zero because it works better that way. Don't think of array indexes as ordinal numbers, but as integer offsets from the beginning of the array.

All arrays in JavaScript are heterogenous (made for use  with mixed data types).

> myArray = [ null , true , -20.01 , "Hello there." , {a:"hello there"} ]
< [null, true, -20.01, "Hello there.", {a: "hello there"} ]

Being objects, array references can be data in a variable, property value, or array element.

> myArray[2] = myArray
< [null, true, (an array), "Hello there.", {a: "hello there"} ]
> myArray[2][2][2][2][4]['a']
< "hello there"

All arrays in JavaScript are one-dimensional (single index per element). However, since an array is a kind of object, and an array element can hold any JavaScript value, we can have a reference to an array be one or more of the values in the array's data list. That means you can simulate two-dimensional arrays by having an array of arrays:

> myArray = [ ["row0col0", "row0col1"], ["r1c0", "r1c1"], ["r2c0", "r2c1"] ]
< (some console notation that means an array with three elements in it, each of which is itself a reference to another array)
> myArray[2][0]
< "r2c0"
> myArray[0][1]
> "row0col1"

Reading from an array element that doesn't exist produces the undefined value.

> myArray = ['a', 'b', 'c']
< ["a", "b", "c"]
> myArray[3]
< undefined
> myArray
< ["a", "b", "c"]

Writing to an array element that doesn't exist lengthens the array to accommodate it.

> myArray[12] = myArray[1000]
< undefined
> myArray
< (notation that means a 13-length array -- an array with elements 0..12)

The padding elements are empty until something is written there. Reading an empty element returns the undefined value.

> myArray[7]
< undefined
> myArray[7] = undefined;
< undefined
> myArray[7]
< undefined

Inspecting the array reveals a difference between an empty element and an element holding a copy of the undefined value. There are several different kinds of `undefined` in JavaScript, but trying to read any of them returns a copy of the undefined value.

> myArray[40] = false
< false
> myArray[20] = null
< null
> myArray

Being an object, arrays also have properties. All arrays come with many properties, most of which are functions. Such functions are what we call methods because they are referenced by object properties and are intended to be run against that object. We'll learn about methods later. For now just think of methods and functions as the same thing.

> myArray.length
< 41
> myArray.join
< function join()
> myArray.join(' ')
< "a b c                                      false"

That means "length" is a key with a number as its value. That number changes whenever the array's length changes. "join" is a key with a function as its value (a reference to a function object). That function returns a string that is built from the contents of the array. This is an example of a method. A method is a function that is stored in an object that can operate on that object. We'll learn more about methods later.

Let's see what happens when we try to write to the length property.

> myArray.join(' ')
< "a b c                                      false"
> myArray.length = 40
< 40
> myArray.join(' ')
< "a b c                                     "
> myArray.length = 41
< 41
> myArray.join(' ')
< "a b c                                      "

Writing a lesser number to the length property shortens the array, and a greater number lengthens the array without remembering what was in that element from before. Let's try some nonsense values.

< myArray.length = -1
> RangeError: Invalid array length
< myArray.length = '*'
> RangeError: Invalid array length
< myArray.length
> 41
> myArray.length = "3"
< "3"
> myArray
< ["a", "b", "c"]
> myArray.length = ""
< ""
> myArray
> []

Direct manipulation of the length property is considered bad practice. We do it here to understand something about JavaScript. We see that the length property is writeable, and yet it is protected by the language from receiving negative numbers or non-number data types.

Let's do something more conventional with an array.

> myArray.push('first')
< 1
> myArray.push('second')
< 2
> myArray.push('third')
< 3
> myArray
< ["first", "second", "third"]
> myArray.pop()
< "third"
> myArray
< ["first", "second"]
> myArray.push("fourth")
< 3
> myArray
< ["first", "second", "fourth"]

Every array comes with methods that can let it be a stack of JavaScript values. This can be handy when you want to use simple data structures to solve problems. There are a ton of handy methods that come with all arrays. See the JavaScript docs (Array) to learn about them.

Let's play with writing new properties to an array.

> myArray = [ "zero", "one", "two" ]
< ["zero", "one", "two"]
> myArray
< ["zero", "one", "two"]
> myArray["myKey"] = "my keyed value"
< "my keyed value"
> myArray
< [ "zero", "one", "two" ]
> Object.keys(myArray)
< ["0", "1", "2", "myKey"]

The Object.keys function builds and returns an array of strings. All the (initialized) indexes of the array are listed first, but cast to string values. Then, all the keys are listed in no reliably defined order.

> myArray['6'] = "six"
< "six"
> myArray
< ["zero", "one", "two", (three empty elements), "six"]
> Object.keys(myArray)
< ["0", "1", "2", "6", "myKey"]

Using a number or a string that parses as a number seems to go into the regular array index store.

> myArray['05'] = "oh five"
< "oh five"
> myArray
< ["zero", "one", "two", (three empty elements), "six"]
> Object.keys(myArray)
< ["0", "1", "2", "6", "myKey", "05"]

Your keys might come back ["0", "1", "2", "6", "05", "myKey"] because object keys may be stored or retrieved in any order. You might find that your keys are reliably stored in the same order every time. Don't trust that effect for writing your code. ECMA doesn't specify any particular iteration sequence for objects, only for arrays. If you rely on the key sequencing behavior of your JS interpreter your script may not run reliably on a different JS interpreter. You can rely on object properties being there, but you can't rely on any particular sequence of those properties.

The string "05" parses as the number 5 but it doesn't write to the index-value store, it writes to the key-value store. The string versions of the indexes are listed as keys. Let's play with that.

> myArray[+'05'] = "five"
< "five"
> myArray
< ["zero", "one", "two", (two empty elements), "five", "six"]
> myArray[05]
< "five"
> myArray['05']
< "oh five"
> myArray['02']
< undefined
> myArray['2']
< "two"
> myArray['2.0']
< undefined

Addressing an array by a number addresses its index-value store. Addressing by string addresses its key-value store, unless that string parses as a number and that number stringifies back into an identical string. Strange.

Let's try some weirder number indexes.

 > myArray[-1] = "negative one"
 > myArray[.1] = "tenth"
 > myArray[7.001] = "more than seven"
 > myArray[100] = "hundred"
 > myArray[1e3] = "thousand"
 > myArray[1e6] = "million"
 > myArray[1e100] = "googol"
 > myArray.length
 < 100001
 > myArray
 < ["zero", "one", "two", ... "five", "six", ... "hundred", ... "thousand", ... "million" ]
 > Object.keys(myArray)
 < ["0", "1", "2", "5", "6", "100", "1000", "1000000", "myKey", "05", "-1", "0.1", "1e+100", "7.001"]

The array is a 1,000,001 elements in length, meaning the array's index-value store can address 0..1000000 as numerical indexes. Writing to array element 1e6 (1000000) causes the interpreter to allocate enough memory to hold a million and one elements. Even though they are mostly uninitialized, all these array elements take up space in memory. Since your computer definitely doesn't have many googolbytes of memory allocated to your Chrome window, that huge number gets stringified and used in a property of the key-value store.

And here's a parting gift from JavaScript.

> myArray[-1]
> "negative one"
> myArray.slice(-1)
< "million"

It seems that some array methods use negative indexes as a reverse index into the current index-value store of the array. To the square brackets, negative one is an invalid index so it's stringified and used as a key. To the slice() method, -1 addresses the last element of the index-value store.



Seeing how an array handles both numbers and strings gives insight into how an array addresses its index-value store (the "real array" inside an Array object), and its key-value store (the regular JavaScript object managing that "real array").

We don't have to memorize all these weird rules!

We just have to memorize a few rules of best practice JavaScript code writing:
    1. Index is distance from beginning of array to beginning of element
    2. JavaScript implements arrays treacherously. It's the endearing JS way
    3. Array indexing is only reliable with a genuine floating point whole number
    4. In the real world, nobody uses keys in JavaScript arrays except:
        a. the length property as a read-only number, or rarely, to shorten an array
        b. to call the array methods that come with JavaScript like myArray.pop()
        c. to add their own array methods they wish came with JavaScript
    5. Some array and string methods treat negatives as directionally reversed indexes
        a. Think distance from the end of the array to the beginning of the element

A method is a function whose reference is stored in an object property. We'll learn about these later.
