Here is one possible solution to yesterday's exercises.


/* Given an array of numbers or strings, returns the median of those values.
 * If it's an array of strings, returns the string that has half of the strings
 * greater than or equal to that string. In the case of an even number of
 * elements, an array of numbers will return the mean of the middle two values,
 * while an array of strings will return the lesser of the middle two values.
 * Behavior is undefined for heterogenous arrays, or if any value of the array
 * is NaN or undefined. Does not mutate the original array.
 */
function median(unsortedAr) {
    if (!(Array.isArray(unsortedAr) && unsortedAr.length)) return null;
    var sortedAr = unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)});
    var midIndex = sortedAr.length / 2 - 0.5;
    if (!(midIndex % 1)) return sortedAr[midIndex];
    // Reaching this line means array length is even and is greater than zero.
    var lVal = sortedAr[Math.floor(midIndex)];     // left of middle as-is
    var lNum = +lVal;                              // left of middle as a number
    var rNum = +sortedAr[Math.floor(midIndex+1)];  // right of middle as a number
    // If either middle can't be parsed to a number, the NaN makes <= be false:
    return (lNum <= rNum) ? (lNum+rNum)/2 : lVal;
}

/* Given an array of numbers or strings, returns the minimum value of all values
 * in the array. Behavior is undefined for heterogenous arrays, or if any value of
 * the array is NaN or undefined. Does not mutate the original array.
 */
function min(unsortedAr) {
    if (!(Array.isArray(unsortedAr) && unsortedAr.length)) return null;
    return unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)})[0];
}

/* Given an array of numbers or strings, returns the maximum value of all values
 * in the array. Behavior is undefined for heterogenous arrays, or if any value of
 * the array is NaN or undefined. Does not mutate the original array.
 */
function max(unsortedAr) {
    if (!(Array.isArray(unsortedAr) && unsortedAr.length)) return null;
    return unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? 1 : -(a>b)})[0];
}

>

A computer scientist would scoff at this min() and max() function because they run in linearithmic time when they only need linear time. You'll learn about time complexity when we get to algorithms. Actually, by writing a bunch more code we could get the median function to run in linear time too. We're new to writing code. Writing algorithms that can handle massive amounts of data is not our focus here. We scoff at algorithm snobs until we become snobs.

Let's look at how the sorting expression works.

Since JS functions are a kind of JS object, a function (a reference to that function object) can be passed to another function as its argument. This opens the door to "functional programming", which can get a bit confusing but there are great benefits to learning about this. It's something that JavaScript is actually good at if you can get past the 
Inception-style thinking and syntax.

The expression that, when evaluated, causes the sort to take place is
    unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)})
The dot operator evaluates left-to-right.
    ( unsortedAr ) . ( concat )() . ( sort ) (...)
The variable `unsortedAr` has a reference to an array, so the expression evaluates to
    (  (some array object in memory) . concat  )() . ( sort )(...)
Being an array, it has a `concat` property, which has a reference to a function. That was put there by JavaScript when the array was created.
    (  the `concat` function of that original array  )() . ( sort )(...)
Running that function (because it has the round argument-specification paretheses after its code reference) with no arguments (because they are empty) creates a copy of the entire array. Using concat in this way is a JS idiom for making a copy of an array. `someArray.concat()` means reference to a new copy of `someArray`.
    ( brand new copy of the original array ) . ( sort )(...)
We make a copy because the sort function mutates the original array, and we don't want our median function to mutate the original array that the user gave us (our user is some other JS code that called our median function). After making that copy of the array, the interpreter finds the reference to that new array's sort() method (function).
    ( the `sort` function of that new copy of the unsorted array )(function ...)
The interpreter sees the round parentheses that indicate the argument list, meaning it knows you want to run that sort function. This time there is an expression to use as the first (only) argument to the sort function. That argument is an anonymous function literal `function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)}`  The interpreter creates a new function as described by that literal and that expression resolves to a reference to that new function object. The function has two parameters and one statement that uses those parameters. It is not run yet, just created in memory.
    ( the `sort` function of a newly created array )( a newly created function )
Now the interpreter runs the `sort` function, passing in the comparator function described by the literal. See the documentation for Array.sort() for details. Whatever the sort method does with its selector (the array specified on the left of its dot operator) and that comparator function is its own business, but according to the JS docs, it's supposed to return a reference to its original selector array after rearranging the contents of that array into sorted order according to the comparator function's judgement of what is supposed to come before what.

So let's think about how the Array.sort() method might work on the inside.
    1. Receive a function that takes two parameters and returns a number
    2. Somehow choose two values from the array we're sorting
    3. Call the function we were given, passing in those two values
    4. If the return value says they are in the wrong order, fix them in the array
    5. Keep doing that until we're satisfied the array has been fully sorted
    6. Return a reference to the array we just rearranged (the same array we were given)

We don't have to know how the sort algorithm works. We just need to know that it uses the function we gave it to do its business. Compare the punch line from min() and max():

    return unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)})[0];

    return unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a>b ? -1 : +(a<b)})[0];

One of these passes into sort() an argument that is a function that results in an ascending sort; the other for a descending sort. It's the same sort method producing an opposite result.

> ['p','z','a','q'].sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)})
< ["a", "p", "q", "z"]
> ['p','z','a','q'].sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? 1 : -(a>b)})
< ["z", "q", "p", "a"]

In either case, the element we want will be at index zero, so we use whatever is there as the return value of our min() or max() function.

> ['p','z','a','q'].sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)})[0]
< "a"
> ['p','z','a','q'].sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? 1 : -(a>b)})[0]
< "z"


We use Array.concat() to make a copy of the original array, like this:

> unsortedAr = ['p','z','a','q']
< ["p", "z", "a", "q"]
> unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)})[0]
< "a"
> unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? 1 : -(a>b)})[0]
< "z"
> unsortedAr  // concat() creates copies to protect unsortedAr from mutation
< ["p", "z", "a", "q"]
> unsortedAr.sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)})[0] // No concat() here
< "a"
> unsortedAr  // The array has been sorted in place
< ["a", "p", "q", "z"]


The JavaScript Array.sort function is an example of functional programming. It accepts a function into a parameter and runs that function in order to do the business of sorting. We pass in a function that takes two arguments and somehow decides which argument belongs earlier in the sort. After it figures out which is supposed to come first, it indicates its ruling in the form of a number, zero for "doesn't matter; either value can be ahead of the other". Any number greater than zero means "reverse this sequencing; the first value belongs after of the second value". Any return value less than zero means "keep this sequencing; the first one belongs ahead of the second one."

We can use functional programming in the functions we write ourselves in JavaScript. These three example functions contain repeated code. Here are the repeated bits:

...(unsortedAr) {
    if (!(Array.isArray(unsortedAr) && unsortedAr.length)) return null;
    return unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){...})[0];
}

I'll factor that out into a new function:

/* Returns whichever element of `ar` is the leftmost value according to `comparator`.
 * If `ar` is not an array, or if `ar` is an empty array, returns the null value.
 */
function firstest(ar, comparator) {
    return Array.isArray(ar) && ar.length ? ar.concat().sort(comparator)[0] : null;
}

ASSIGNMENT: refactor the min() and max() function to functional programming style. Use the provided function firstest() and a single line of code each min() and max() to get the job done. Here are the originals:

/* Given an array of numbers or strings, returns the minimum value of all values
 * in the array. Behavior is undefined for heterogenous arrays, or if any value of
 * the array is NaN or undefined. Does not mutate the original array.
 */
function min(unsortedAr) {
    if (!(Array.isArray(unsortedAr) && unsortedAr.length)) return null;
    return unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? -1 : +(a>b)})[0];
}

/* Given an array of numbers or strings, returns the maximum value of all values
 * in the array. Behavior is undefined for heterogenous arrays, or if any value of
 * the array is NaN or undefined. Does not mutate the original array.
 */
function max(unsortedAr) {
    if (!(Array.isArray(unsortedAr) && unsortedAr.length)) return null;
    return unsortedAr.concat().sort(function(a,b){return a<b ? 1 : -(a>b)})[0];
}

EXTRA CHALLENGING OPTIONAL ASSIGNMENT: refactor min(), max(), and median() to functional programming style. You may need to throw away firstest() and create one or more of your own shared functions. What makes it functional programming is that you're passing functions around just like any other piece of data.
