When calling a function in JavaScript, not all arguments are required, and excess arguments are tolerated. If there are more parameters than arguments, the left-side parameters get populated, and the extra parameters are left undefined. If there are more arguments than parameters, the extra arguments are discarded.

Suppose you have a function like this
  function myFunc(a, b) { };
You can call that function in these ways:
  myFunc()                        // inside myFunc, a is undefined, b is undefined
  myFunc(5)                       // inside myFunc, a is 6, b is undefined
  myFunc(5, "hello")              // inside myFunc, a is 5, b is "hello"
  myFunc(5, "hello", false)       // inside myFunc, a is 5, b is "hello"

Let's make some more functions. Here is a bit of code to total up all the values of an array.

    var ar = [ 5, 0.9, 12.2, 71, -20 ];
    var sum;
    for (var i = 1; i <= ar.length; ++i) {
      // Put code here to total up a sum. Fix any bugs you see.
    }
    console.log("inline-coded sum " + sum);

Now refactor that code into a function `arraySum` to make these lines work:
    console.log("function call sum #1: " + arraySum( [-2.4] ));
    console.log("function call sum #2: " + arraySum( [] ));
    console.log("function call sum #3: " + arraySum( [5, 12, -40] ));
You can throw away and re-use any of the previous code you want. Just get the above lines to do what seems right to you by writing a function to do the summing work.

Add some error checking that seems reasonable to you until these do what you think is right:
    console.log("function call sum #4: " + arraySum( 3 ));
    console.log("function call sum #5: " + arraySum( [ "3" ] ));
    console.log("function call sum #6: " + arraySum( [ 1, "2", 3] ));
    console.log("function call sum #7: " + arraySum( [ 1, "too", 3] ));

Now write a method named `arrayProduct` that takes an array and returns the cumulative product of all the elements of that array. Make it work with these lines in a way that seems reasonable:
    console.log("product #1: " + arrayProduct( [-2.4] );
    console.log("product #2: " + arrayProduct( [] );
    console.log("product #3: " + arrayProduct( [5, 12, -40] );

You should have two functions that were declared by code that follows one of these basic forms:
    var arraySum = function() { /* bla bla bla */ };
    var arrayProduct = function() { /* yadda yadda yadda */ };
or
    function arraySum() { /* bla bla bla */ }
    function arrayProduct() { /* yadda yadda yadda */ }

Try rewriting your `arraySum` and `arrayProduct` functions with functional programming, so they each call this function to do their work:

    /* Given an array, a function, and an initial value, this function runs that passed-in
     * function against each element of the array. The function provided is iteratively called
     * with up to four arguments. The first argument is the initial or running accumulator, the
     * second argument is the iteratively selected element of the array, third is the index of
     * that element, and fourth is the entire array. Default initial accumulator value is 0.
     * Returns the resulting accumulator value after performing the function call once per
     * array element.
     */
    function arrayReduce(array, func, accum) {
        if (accum === undefined) accum = 0;
        for (var i =  /* bla bla bla */    ; ++i) {
            accum = func(accum, array[i], i, array);
        }
        return accum;
    }

    /* Given an array, return the cumulative sum of that array.
     */
    function arraySum(array){ /* ***your code here*** */  }

    /* Given an array, return the cumulative product of that array.
     */
    function arrayProduct(array){ return arrayReduce(array, function(a,b){return a*b;}, 1); }

These two functions arraySum and arrayProduct each receive an array and then call arrayReduce, passing in that array and some function. The function each of those functions pass to arrayReduce is a single step of the arrayReduce element walk. If the function that gets passed into arrayReduce doesn't actually need all four arguments to do its job, it has fewer than four parameters and it still works.

Understanding how this little piece of code works gives you solid footing into functional programming in JavaScript.