In JavaScript, the built-in data structure that provides us with a key-value store is called an "object". Other programming languages provide a similar data structure called a "hash map", "hash table", or simply a "hash" collection. All these words refer to the concept of a key-value store, which is a collections of properties (key-value pairs). Each property has a key (name) and a value (anything that can fit in one variable). They are designed to rapidly look up the value from the key.

JavaScript is an object-oriented classless language. In a language that supports classes, the word "object" refers to a bundle of variables and code that knows how to operate on those variables, and a "class" is a description of how to make one of those bundles. A class is like a blueprint for a particular kind of building, and any number of individual buildings may be created according to that blueprint.

JavaScript was intended to facilitate programmers organizing their code into objects but it took an unconventional approach to object-oriented programming. JavaScript has no concept of a class, and yet it can create any number of similar objects. In JavaScript parlance, the word "object" means key-value collection. Any reference to a function (a kind of JS object with a special code-management talent) may be the value of any property (key-value pair). Object-oriented programmers refer to a function that an object carries around as a method.

Here's an example. Let's pretend we're building a social network. Each user knows its own name, knows its list of friends, and also knows how to acquire a new friend.

var me =
    { id       : 4288
    , name     : "Ebineezer Scrooge"
    , friends  : [ 5791, 3877, 3038 ]
    , befriend : function(userId){ this.friends.push(userId); }
    };

When that statement finishes executing, there will be three new objects on the memory heap...
    (ref#1)   [ 5791, 3877, 3038 ]
    (ref#2)   function(userId){ this.friends.push(userId); }
    (ref#3)   { "id":4288, name":"Ebineezer Scrooge" , "friends":(ref#1) , "befriend":(ref#2) }
...and one new variable...
    me == (ref#3)
This `ref` notation is not part of JavaScript, it's just a name I'm using here to talk about three different references to objects sitting in memory somewhere.

The example here introduces the `this` keyword, which is a universal identifier for an object available for the methods of that object; an individual object's reference to itself. There are subtleties to what `this` actually means, but that's a decent first approximation at this introductory level of understanding.

Now that we have a user object and a `me` variable referencing it, we can do something like this:

    me.befriend(2271);

That will cause that user to acquire one more user ID on its `friends` array. Here's how
    1. Find `me` variable's contents: (ref#3)
    2. Dot operator means treat the left value (ref#3) as a reference to an object, and the
       right value "befriend" as a key into that object, leading to property value (ref#2).
    3. Trailing parentheses means treat the (ref#2) as a reference to a function and call it,
       passing 2271 as the only argument, and bind (ref#3) as `this` because `me` is left of dot.
    4. Run (ref#2) function's only statement: `this.friends.push(userId);`
        1. (this.friends) means (ref#3)["friends"] which means (ref#1), a reference to an array object.
        2. (ref#1).push means the `push` method that comes with all JS arrays.
        3. Trailing parentheses means call Array.push with (ref#1) as `this` and 2271 as only argument.
        4. The effect is to lengthen the array by one element at the end with 2271 in that new element.
    5. Return from Array.push function and then from (ref#2) function.

The function at (ref#2) is actually an anonymous function. `me.befriend.name` has an empty string in it because the `function` keyword in the function literal has no name before the `(` parameter list. Since that function is referenced by a property of that user object (ref#3), we call that function a "method" of that object. Most methods are intended to do something with the data of their object by using the `this` object reference to read or write other properties. In this case, the `befriend` method lengthens the `friends` array, both of which are constituent properties of the same object.

We might have a second object, referenced by a second variable.

var tinyTim =
    { id       : 7713
    , name     : "Tim Cratchit"
    , friends  : [ 571, 3038 ]
    , befriend : function(userId){ this.friends.push(userId); }
    };

Suppose I, Ebineezer Scrooge befriend Tiny Tim. We might have code like this:
    me.befriend(tinyTim.id);
which right now would be the same thing as
    me.befriend(7713);

This will cause my `friends` array to grow by one element. Tiny Tim's is still only two friends long. If Tiny Tim returns my affections and befriends me, another line of code might be like this:
    tinyTim.befriend(me.id);
or
    tinyTim.befriend(4288);

Each of these lines of code only affects the `friends` array of the one object referenced by the variable `me` or `tinyTim`. There are two objects in two different places in memory.

This is a small taste of object-oriented JavaScript. There may be many social network user variables in memory at one time. Each one is a little model of a social network user with a name, an ID number and a collection of friend IDs. In this example we have two separate copies of the befrend function, just as we have two separate arrays of friends. We probably don't want a seperate copy of that function with its own separate code for each user. We want seperate properties to save state because those things are different per user, but we don't want seperate copies of the methods, since they are always the same for everybody. Furthermore, we want to describe one format of a user, and then create a bunch of individual user objects on the basis of that format, much as a class would describe a kind of object. We'll learn how to simulate classes in the next unit.
